# Water-Demand-Forecast
Determinants of water demand or investigate the variables that influences water demand adjusted for seasonal patterns in the series
There is an on-going discussion on the operations and centralization of water supply systems. The implementation of a central operational system is purposively aimed at cost reduction as well as rapid improvements in the operational quality extended to how the machines are used to achieve the operations objective.

The common goal here is targeted at controlling the systems in such a way that the models are adequately implemented to lead to optimal growth. The essence of a short-term water demand model is a direct example of the kinds of models that allows the efficient forecast of the overall quantity control and the scheduling of pumps. These types of models are set-up to achieve a number of viable goals, including goals targeted at improving water utilities and usage; a case in point is Netherlands where about 57% of water supply in 2012 is majorly controlled from short term water demand forecast. The penetration of these type of model goes a long way in driving the effective implementation of projects which are executed on a short-term basis in the projection and forecast of water demand. This is also found to be applicable, especially with reference to number of executed utility projects in the United States, accounting for about 90% penetration in 2016.

A major concern of water demand model is in the accuracy and precision of the model; targeted at avoiding the control of sub-optimal systems and in the prevention of operations that will override the control settings, irrespective of whether the control settings are essential part of the model or not, leading to the satisfaction of the operational conditions. The forecast model plays a very crucial role in the estimation of average forecast errors – be it underestimation or overestimation. The enormous forecast errors may create an adequate control adjustment as well enable the operational conditions should in case there is a problem of over carrying capacity in the supply of water systems. Some contributions have discussed the size of the errors and the effect it has on the aggregate model, with emphasis on the coefficient of determination (R_2) and the forecast error estimator, indicating the values when underestimated or overestimated.
	
**Problem Identification**
The water demand forecast model is used to improve several control systems and their uses across urban water management issues, including water restriction and pricing policy, pipe capacities and pumping stations, the estimation of the size and operations of the reservoir, and the planning of new systems for expansion. Operational and management efficiency is attained through short-term forecasting while planning and design are effectively done through long-term forecasting.

**The identified problems can be articulated as;**
	The modeling of water demand should use only the training data (70% of the entire dataset) and the test or validation dataset (30%) will be reserved for performance. The testing data should be used to perform residual analysis. The testing data should be used to perform residual analysis. These are estimates of the error (noise or water disturbance) in our model. Here, the regression analysis and ANN will be used as a basis for comparison. 

	Weekly data cannot effectively deal with holidays and lag relationships (past values of water demand). Daily data can provide better forecast (with lower root mean square error) for short to medium term forecasting period, given that the analysis period is from 1993 to 2002 and including only the summer months; 1 May to 3 September (Tom Reilly, 2013). In designing and mostly, operation of urban water supply systems, quick response to demand level shifts is essential and with days of the week, management can miss an important event. A case in point is the Walkerton incidence (CBC, 2010) that led to illness affecting 5000 residents and left seven dead when car manure washed into the well (May 2000 – December 2004).

	The SARIMA (Seasonal Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average) is an extended version of the ARIMA and includes the seasonal component of the climatology series. The SARIMA will be used to account for all periods (peak and off-peak) whilst improving the ARIMA by adding the seasonality component in the forecast of the time series. In simple terms, instead of focusing on peak periods only, the approach will look at the composite (peak and off-peak) and use the seasonality ARIMA.

**Objective of the Paper**
The purpose of the research is to estimate the relationship between climatological variables and peak demand with emphasis on the magnitude or size of the effect and the policy direction. In forecasting short-term demand, linear and multiple regression models are used to quantify the effects of the climatological variables (rainfall and temperature at current and past values) on peak water demand using daily data from 2010 -2019. An autoregressive integrated moving-average (ARIMA) model will be used to forecast the water demand trend.
Scope and application of the problem.


The significance of the climatic variables (rainfall, maximum air temperature and past water demand) and their associated effect and correlation can be better studied by using daily (frequency) data to identify trends in water demand. Weekly data cannot effectively deal with holidays and lag relationship (past values of water demand). Daily data can provide better forecast (with lower root mean square error) for short to medium term forecasting period, given that the analysis period is from 1993 to 2002 and including only the summer months; 1 May to 3 September (Tom Reilly, 2013). 
In designing and mostly, operation of urban water supply system, quick response to demand level shifts is essential and with days of the week, management can miss an important event. A case in point is the Walkerton incidence that led to illness affecting 5000 residents and left seven dead when car manure washed into the well (May, 2000 – December, 2004).
